Abdi Ambari
Capstone Midterm Paper Draft
11th October 2022
My Mother and I.
My capstone project is going to be an interactive installation that tells the story, primarily using 2D animation, of how my mother developed a crippling fear of lizards. I intend to use this story about lizards to tell a larger story about my mother’s journey in motherhood as it pertains to me and how I grew up. I aim to incorporate the use of sound, metaphoric animation style, and the use of a large physical space to tell this story. As I build this project, I look to the artists Billie Zangewa, Biubers, and the joint work by Géraldine Tobé, Michel Ekeba, and Jean David Nkot for inspiration. These artists and their work inspire my capstone in the following ways:
 
1. 	Billie Zangewa

The story I am telling in my capstone is about motherhood from the perspective of a mother and a child going through trials and coming out the other side not resentful of their past. Instead, they acknowledge what has happened and proceed to build a life that they want with whatever these past experiences have left them with. This is exactly the story of Zangewa’s artistic journey. She uses scrap pieces of silk to create beautiful tapestries about her life. She describes the intention behind the use of scrap material when she says, “[w]e can still stitch and thread together something beautiful with what remains.” implying that these scraps embody the message of what is left over after use, wear and tear-as a metaphor for life after trauma- is not useless and can be beautiful. In my capstone, I aim to embody this theme of building from what is left over. I aim to do this by exploring the beauty of what has remained in me and my mother’s lives that is a direct consequence of our journey. This theme also lends itself to creating a piece that feels beautiful although it is about trauma similar to the beautiful works by Zangewa. Like Zangewa, I am also learning how to balance heavy messages and beauty. I plan on accomplishing this through the intentional use of shapes, colors, and metaphors as can be seen in my character design and environment design drafts so far. Practically, this process looks like prioritizing how the construction of my characters and the 2D world make me feel. Additionally, it looks like  making sure that all I create inspires feelings I associate with beauty that is born out of not-so-great experiences.
           
2. 	Géraldine Tobé, Michel Ekeba and Jean David Nkot

Géraldine Tobé, Michel Ekeba, and Jean David Nkot are African artists who, together, created a painting that was launched into space. The intention of this project was to raise awareness about the urgency of environmental sustainability practices in Africa. These artist sought to break down barriers surrounding how and where Africa-made art is made and displayed respectively.  African art has been limited in its global reach. The exception is art about stereotypical African ways of life (life in villages, work about African people and their relationship to wildlife, etc.) or in mediums that are deemed African such as Afrobeats music. However, there is so much more to Africa than just cultural traditions and stereotypical “African issues.” There are stories that are surprising, unconventional, and stories that do not fit any popular stereotypes. There are stories that require an acknowledgment of the nuance of the complex existence of Africans. These are stories like my mother’s and these artists’ project. These artists created art that is not conventionally what African art is considered to be like. They alsodisplayed this African art is it in a foreign medium-space. These two aspects of their work are aspects that I wish to incorporate in my capstone. I return to their work to remind myself to actively fight against the urge to make my art fit a specific mould because it is about an African experience. Their work reminds me to be experiemnetal in what create and how I create it. An example of this is how I am creating my work as a 2D abstract animation. The work also inspires me to think of creative ways to display my art similar to how they chose to display theirs in outer space. Specifically, it encourages me to think of ways in which African art has not been displayed before and displaying my art in that medium/space. This is in line with a personal goal I have for my capstone which is to push back against limitations I have put on myself and my work. 

3. 	Biubers

Biuber’s is a multi-media artist who draws inspiration for her work from her seemingly limitless imagination. She approaches creating by first completely reimagining the world in a way that, potentially, only makes sense to her and then tries to present this visually. Her output is extremely intricate pieces of work that inspire audiences to redefine the limits of their own imaginations.[6] As an artist myself, I am very interested in exploring the concept of limits in whatever ways I encounter them in this project. In the case of this project and how it relates to Biubers, I am interested in exploring the limits I have put on my own process in animation. I do this to come closer to creating an animated piece that best describes my authentic style and that does justice to how special the story I am telling is. Practically, I am learning from Biubers how to rethink character design, especially when drawing inspiration from metaphors. An example is how the main character design has a rose for a body and a cloud for a head. These are metaphors for my mother being named Rose and people around her often commenting on how she has her “head in the clouds” respectively. I am also learning about animation tools and strategies, such as using textured brushes and using animation boils. By imitating Biubers’ experimental creation practic,. I am learning to imagine more vividly and more abstractly in the hopes that my piece can have the unique and striking beauty that Biubers’ work has. Additionally, Biubers includes elements of her culture in her work in ways that still have her own artistic voice present and prominent. In my piece, I do want to explore my individuality. However, I cannot separate the story of African motherhood from culture. It is easy to fall into the stereotypical category of “African art about African culture” that I am trying to steer away from. Due to this, I am trying to learn from Biubers, to whom I have direct access, how she strikes such a careful balance so beautifully.  
 
A lot remains uncertain about my project as of now. However, with the lessons I am learning from these incredibly talented artists and the resources I am discovering I have access to, I am confident that I will tell a story in a way that I am very proud of.

WORKS CITED


(1389) Biubers - YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/. Accessed 4 Oct. 2022.
“Artist Billie Zangewa: Feminity, Motherhood & Art.” TRUE Africa, 19 Nov. 2015, https://trueafrica.co/article/artist-billie-zangewa-on-feminity-expressing-her-black-female-identity-and-being-a-mother-and-artist/.
“Artwork.” African Space Art Project, https://www.africanspaceartproject.com/artwork/. Accessed 4 Oct. 2022.
How to Create Dynamic and Fun Line Boil Animations. https://www.premiumbeat.com/blog/how-to-create-line-boil-animations/. Accessed 4 Oct. 2022.
Iderawumi, Mustapha. “African Space Art Project – A World First for African Art and Space Science.” Space in Africa, 11 May 2022, https://africanews.space/african-space-art-project-a-world-first-for-african-art-and-space-science/.
Maloney, Martin. “Life in a Stereotype Factory.” ETC: A Review of General Semantics, vol. 10, no. 2, 1953, pp. 83–96.
Okoro, Enuma. “The Textile Artist Who’s Always Known How to Care for Herself.” The Cut, 26 June 2020, https://www.thecut.com/2020/06/artist-profile-billie-zangewa.html.
Sklair, Leslie. The Icon Project: Architecture, Cities, and Capitalist Globalization. Oxford University Press, 2017, https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190464189.001.0001.
Three Artists Create Contemporary Art to Be Launched into Space | EUMETSAT. https://www.eumetsat.int/three-artists-create-contemporary-art-be-launched-space. Accessed 4 Oct. 2022.
Whiteley, Nigel. “Pop, Consumerism, and the Design Shift.” Design Issues, vol. 2, no. 2, 1985, pp. 31–45. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/1511416.
波比 (@biubers) • Instagram Photos and Videos. https://www.instagram.com/biubers/. Accessed 4 Oct. 2022.
 





