
## Bio

Abdi Hamisi Ambari is an interactive artist, illustrator, and creative coder. Abdi was born and raised in Tanzania and maintains a strong connection to the country through his work on projects that aim to empower Tanzanian youth, despite currently being located in the United Arab Emirates. Currently, Abdi is a Senior at New York University Abu Dhabi studying Interactive Media. Both his artistic and professional experiences span a broad spectrum of disciplines. In a recent role as Product Associate Intern at Fintech startup, Ziina, Abdi excelled at product management, customer success initiatives, UI and UX design and implementation as well as product strategy. Abdi has also developed skills in web development, 2D animation, software engineering and data analysis by working with companies including Microsoft, Mozilla and Katch Media. Currently, Abdi is interested in exploring the benefits of supporting cross-functional roles within the tech industry. Artistically, Abdi is always looking for innovative ways to integrate his skills in animation, design, and coding into whatever project he sets out on. In more recent artistic projects, Abdi has explored subjects such as robot consciousness, afrofuturism, and the Black African identity both independently and with external entities including notable companies such as Google AI. Abdi sees himself ultimately being able to channel his broad range of interests and experiences into building social and technological initiatives to promote equity in education opportunity provision for low-income Tanzanian youth.


## Artist Statement:

I am fascinated by limits. This fascination comes from my own experience growing up in an environment where I was more aware of the limits imposed on me than the freedoms I could have and how to have them. These limits were informed by my family’s low income, my positionality within existing racial and ethnic hierarchies and the inadequacies that existed within the education system I grew up in. Upon arriving at university at New York University Abu Dhabi, I found myself suddenly surrounded by language of possibility. No one spoke of limits; we spoke only of the potential that we had that was based on the access to the extensive number of resources at the university. To unlearn the limit-centered thinking I had grown up with, I decided to explore my freedoms by challenging all the limits society and I had put on me and my way of thinking.

This process, practically, entailed walking into whatever academic and creative space I was in and immediately asking what constraints existed within that space and dedicating my work in the space to push back at the existing bounds. In the technology space, I am interested in exploring and redefining the limits of human-computer interaction as it pertains to the integration of the human condition within tech without the baseline for human condition being western practice. An example is when working on a recent project where I aimed to code curiosity. I based my definitions of curiosity on African literature that included African poetry and African philosophy.

In the creative space, I am interested in redefining limits in whatever way I can while also exploring different elements of my identity. An example is the project I undertook independently to challenge the limitations existing with man-made poetry space, namely, mortality as it relates to the active creation of poetry. I experimented with work from deceased and retired poets of color. I input as much data as I could into a machine learning program that I built, and instructed it to learn the tone of voice, themes, use of language, and literary techniques used by these poets in their work. I, then, coded the machine learning model to create new poems using all that it had learned about the artists’ works with the intention of creating works that resemble work that they could have made based on existing data. The results were beautiful.

In exercising my existence within freedom, I am, ultimately, trying to learn how to teach people with backgrounds similar to mine how to do the same. I am already doing this by hosting regular workshops for Tanzanian youth on how to access scholarships, how to write cover letters, how to code and many other skills that could help them find financial freedom. However, I want to do more. This is the work that I want to dedicate my life to. I want to teach and bring freedom of all forms to my community and I cannot wait to see how my creative and academic journeys help me reach my goal.

